The first part is about inheritance,
and what do I mean about inheritance?
Let's take a look at this demo,
this is using three color variables and
all three are setting colors, and
then we're using them in this like
extremely cut down version of a blog.
So notice that even though I'm setting my
variables on the root element which as
we've said, is just the HTML element.
They're actually available on
the heading here, they're available on
the the article here, let's take a look
at the actual HTML that we have.
It looks like this.
So let's go back to the CSS,
these variables are available
basically everywhere, and
the reason they're available everywhere
is because they inherit down.
But what does that mean in practice?
So notice that in every
blog post of sorts here,
we are using this primary color.
And in our HTML, we have applied
a class of alt to the second one
because we wanted it to
use the secondary color.
So we could actually go to our CSS,
and do something like this.
We can set primary color
to secondary color.
And it just all adapts.
After that point, everything inside
article is just inheriting this primary
colour instead of the one from root.
Because that's just how CSS
inherited properties work.
So the first thing to keep in mind
is that CSS variables are not just
actually CSS properties,
they're inherited CSS properties.
And anything that applies
to any other inherited
CSS property applies to
CSS variables as well.
One of the major ways we can take
advantage of this inheritances is media
queries.
We can only override a few
variables in the media query,
and have all our styles adjust
instead of rewriting a bunch of rules.
So let's see how this works in practice
with a dark mode version of this website.
So something you might not have
seen before is the media query for
dark mode,
which has prefers Kohler scheme dark.
And anything you put in
here only applies when
your user has selected
dark mode in the row S.
And we can override any
variables we want here.
I'm gonna copy them and edit them.
Another thing you could do for
dark mode, and
I'm just gonna add styles here,
because like we said it's fine.
So another thing you could do is, if you
set the color scheme property to light and
dark, it means that your CSS adapts
to light and dark mode just fine.
So then, let me set my OS to dark mode.
Notice that the background already adopts,
that's because I use the color
scheme property to say, hey, this is okay,
you can modify my website for dark mode.
So notice both the background and
the text color have adapted.
So all we need to do is fill in
the gaps to make this look better.
We can change the heading to instead
of white, we can use Canvas,
and that makes it change to black and
dark mode.
And now, let's change the tinted
background because it
looks awful like that.
And we're gonna change our
colors to make them lighter.
And instead of having a tinted
background that is white,
semi transparent white,
we're gonna have a semi transparent black.
And there it is,
we just overrode three variables,
and we have a very basic dark mode.
Obviously, if you were creating
an actual dark mode for
a website,
you would need to tweak it a lot more, but
for like one minute of coding,
we already have something.
And if we weren't using custom properties,
we would have to override
a lot more rules.
So in case you haven't seen the Canvas and
Canvas text keywords,
these are actually relatively new,
although they're supported very widely.
They are CSS system colors, they actually
existed in the specification for
a long time, but
we recently changed how they work.
So the way they work is,
if they were custom properties
they would look like this.
Canvas basically means whites in light
mode and black in dark mode, and
Canvas text is the opposite.
So, they're quite convenient in the sense
that you don't have to define your
own custom properties for
these you just use the existing keywords.
But you have to use color scheme
like dark to enable this.
And Canvas and Canvas text are actually
the default background and
text colors these days.
So in some cases,
inheritance is actually a problem,
usually it helps,
as weve seen it can be very convinient.
Why wouldn't we want the inheritance?
Well, here's an example.
So here, we've used corner size on
the universal selector, so we can just set
the corner size custom property on any
element and it introduces a corner.
This is a very useful pattern because
it means that we can have our own
properties that just apply
certain effects when we set them.
And we don't have to apply the usage,
the code that uses them on multiple rules.
We just set them in one place and
then we use them wherever we want.
And it's basically the same clip
pass code that we've seen before it,
except that this time it's
applied on everything.
But as we see here,
the fact that it's applied on
everything means that it also means
that when we set it on an element,
it inherits down on elements that we
don't actually want to have a cut corner.
Here, our code is a paragraph with an
inline element inside it, a mark element,
but it could be anything.
Could be a call and it could be
a code element or whatever, and
we obviously don't want to cut out
the corner of the inline element,
we only want it to apply the cut
out corner on the paragraph.
And imagine in a real website you would
have an entire structure in there, and
you most definitely don't want cut out
corners on every single element inside.
So what can you do?
One way to disable inheritance
is to just set the property
itself on the universal selector and
just set it to initial.
So initial is a CSS wide keyword that
returns a property to its initial value,
not its initial value from
the browser style sheet,
its initial value from the CSS
specification basically.
And for custom properties, this means
that they don't really have a value.
So the clip path property is not applied,
this is a little hand wavy not
even not really have a value.
But we're gonna see it in a lot more
detail in later in this workshop.
So this works, and it's fine and
we can always opt in inheritance on
a case by case basis if we wanted, if we
actually wanted our mark element to have a
cut out corner, we can just apply in here.
It's because like we said,
there regular CSS properties.
Everything that applies to other
CSS properties applies to custom
properties as well.
So one thing to remember is that
you can disable inheritance
by setting the property to initial
on the universal selector or
always in the selector that
you're actually using this.
In some cases the custom property only
makes sense for example on form elements,
so we would we would put the declaration
that sets it up to initial
on the same rule as well.
There is actually a newer more explicit
way to disable inheritance and
it's called the Add property rule,
it looks like this.
And the property rule allows us to do
a ton of useful things with custom
properties, we're gonna be seeing
it throughout this workshop.
So this is just scratching the surface.
But it comes with a syntax descriptor,
which here we're gonna set two
star which means anything goes,
and inherits descriptor
which we'll set to false.
And an initial value descriptor
which is not actually useful here.
So, let's remove this rule where
we made it explicitly inherit, and
we don't actually need
this rule anymore either.
And see we've added this rule and
it stopped inheriting.
If we remove this rule it
will start inheriting again.
So, what property allows us to
register our properties and
control how they behave?
You may have seen it as something
that looks like this in JavaScript,
CSS.registerProperty.
This was an earlier syntax,
it's still supported,
it's still useful in some cases.
CSS doesn't actually provide feedback for
errors.
If you have an add property rule and it's
not working, it might make sense to try
the JavaScript API, because that
actually gives you meaningful errors.
Like for example,
you forgot the initial value property,
which is required if
the syntax is not star.
But if you use the Add property rule,
you don't get any feedback,
you just sit there, looking at your code,
wondering why it's not working,
I've done that a lot of times.
So, the downside of that property
is that it's not actually very well
supported today.
That's the one thing that we're
going to mention today that is not
widely supported, but I still felt
that it's important to discuss A,
because it solves so many use cases.
And B, because even though it's
only supported in chromium and
chromium powered browsers,
today, for better or for worse,
this actually gives it a very
significant market share.
Take a look at this, even though
it's only supported in Chromium,
or chromium powered browsers,
that still gives it a 70% market share.
And there is no opposition from other
browser vendors about implementing it,
it's just a matter of doing the work.
And Safari has already said that they
have plans to implement it very soon.
But wherever possible, we are going
to discuss workarounds as well, so
that we can do certain things without
our property whenever that's feasible.